WE LOVE STORIES
THAT TERRIFY US...
STORIES THAT
ENCHANT US...
STORIES THAT INSPIRE US...
AND WE ALWAYS HAVE.
THE POWER OF VISUAL
STORY-TELLING
IS NOT A MODERN
PHENOMENON.
FEATURE FILMS TODAY
ARE USING TECHNIQUES
DEVELOPED WAY BACK
IN THE DISTANT PAST.
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS ARTISTS
GRAPPLED WITH WAYS TO BRING
THEIR STORIES ALIVE, TO
CAPTIVATE THEIR AUDIENCE.
THIS IS THE STORY OF HOW
OUR ANCIENT ANCESTORS
MADE THE DISCOVERIES
THAT HAVE GIVEN FILM
SUCH A HOLD OVER
OUR IMAGINATIONS.
♪
EVERY YEAR, SEVEN BILLION
PEOPLE THROUGHOUT THE WORLD
PAY MONEY TO DO THIS:
SIT DOWN IN FRONT
OF A LARGE SCREEN
AND WATCH PICTURES
TELL A STORY.
YOU'LL BE ALL RIGHT.
OH, MA. MA!
MAA-AAA. MAA-AAAA.
WHEN WE WATCH A
REALLY GOOD FILM
SOMETHING
EXTRAORDINARY HAPPENS.
WE BECOME SO INVOLVED
WITH WHAT'S GOING ON
WE FEEL AS THOUGH WE'RE
LIVING IN THE STORY OURSELVES.
VISUAL STORY TELLING
HAS A UNIQUE POWER
OVER OUR IMAGINATIONS.
IT CAPTIVATES US.
HOME, PIG.
THIS IS GEORGE MILLER,
THE MAN RESPONSIBLE
FOR A SERIES OF BOX OFFICE
HITS, INCLUDING BABE.
IT'S THE JOB OF THE STORYTELLER
TO ENGAGE AN AUDIENCE
AS MUCH AS YOU CAN.
YOU BRING TO BEAR ALL
YOUR TECHNIQUES, WISDOM
AND KNOWLEDGE
OF FILMMAKING
IN ORDER TO
ENCHANT THE AUDIENCE,
TO HAVE THEM
SUSPEND THEIR DISBELIEF
TO ACTUALLY BELIEVE WHAT'S
HAPPENING BEFORE THEM.
BUT STORYTELLING IS NOT
SOMETHING THAT WAS INVENTED
IN FILM WHICH IS
ONLY 100 YEARS OLD
AND TELEVISION WHICH
IS ONLY HALF A CENTURY.
IT GOES RIGHT BACK
TO THE BEGINNING OF
HUMAN ENGAGEMENT,
REALLY.
>>SO HOW DID FILM GET THE
ABILITY TO TRANSPORT US
TO IMAGINARY WORLDS?
WHERE DID THE
INGREDIENTS COME FROM
THAT GIVE IT SUCH A
COMPELLING HOLD OVER US?
TO FIND THE ANSWER, WE NEED
TO TRACE VISUAL STORYTELLING
BACK TO ITS ANCIENT ORIGINS,
AND WHAT BETTER PLACE TO START
THAN AT THE VERY
DAWN OF CIVILIZATION?
WE HAVE COME
TO MESOPOTAMIA
IN THE DESERT SANDS
OF THE MIDDLE EAST.
SO MANY OF THE THINGS WE
TAKE FOR GRANTED TODAY
ORIGINATED HERE.
FARMING, MATHEMATICS,
WRITING...
THEY ALL STARTED
BETWEEN TWO RIVERS -
THE TIGRIS AND
THE EUPHRATES.
BUT THE REASON WE'VE COME
TO MESOPOTAMIA IS BECAUSE
IT WAS HERE IN THE 19TH
CENTURY THAT A BRITISH
ARCHAEOLOGIST MADE A
REVELATORY DISCOVERY.
HIS NAME WAS
AUSTEN HENRY LAYARD.
LAYARD AND HIS TEAM WERE
EXCAVATING ANCIENT SITES
THROUGHOUT MESOPOTAMIA
AND FOUND MANY TREASURES.
BUT FAR AND AWAY THE
MOST INTRIGUING OF THESE
WAS A CACHE OF 25,000
BROKEN CLAY TABLETS
COVERED WITH
UNREADABLE MARKINGS.
THE TABLETS WERE
BROUGHT BACK TO LONDON
AND PAINSTAKINGLY
REASSEMBLED.
THE MARKINGS WERE
FOUND TO BE THE WORLD'S
FIRST WRITTEN LANGUAGE
- CUNEIFORM.
SCHOLARS ORIGINALLY
ASSUMED THAT THE TABLETS
WERE JUST COURT
RECORDS OR ACCOUNTS.
BUT THEN AFTER YEARS OF STUDY
THEIR CODE WAS FINALLY CRACKED.
SOME OF THESE TABLETS
ACTUALLY TOLD A STORY.
IT WAS THE FIRST
STORY EVER WRITTEN.
IT WAS A STORY THAT BEGAN AND
ENDED IN THE FIRST CITY EVER
BUILT - A CITY IN WHAT IS NOW
SOUTHERN IRAQ, CALLED URUK.
BUILT 6,000 YEARS AGO, URUK WAS
FOR MANY CENTURIES THE WORLD'S
LARGEST CITY, WITH WALLS THAT
RAN FOR MORE THAN FIVE MILES
AND A POPULATION OF
ALMOST HALF A MILLION.
TODAY, SADLY, WAR AND THE
ENCROACHING DESERT HAVE ALL
BUT DESTROYED THIS WONDER
OF THE ANCIENT WORLD.
BUT WHAT HAS SURVIVED IS THE
STORY THAT THIS CITY INSPIRED.
THE STORY OF GILGAMESH: THE
WORLD'S FIRST GREAT HERO.
THE STORY OF GILGAMESH
TELLS OF ONE MAN'S SEARCH
FOR ETERNAL LIFE.
IN A SERIES OF
DARING ADVENTURES,
GILGAMESH DEFEATS MONSTERS
AND CHALLENGES THE GODS
BEFORE RETURNING HOME
TO HIS BELOVED URUK.
SO COMPELLING WAS THIS
STORY OF AN ACTION HERO
THAT IT WAS PASSED
DOWN FOR GENERATIONS.
AND 4,000 YEARS
AFTER IT WAS FIRST TOLD
IT'S STILL POPULAR TODAY
HERE IN THE MIDDLE EAST.
THE STORY OF GILGAMESH
HAD EXPLOITED THE UNIVERSAL
HUMAN DESIRE
FOR A HERO.
MOST GREAT
STORIES HAVE A HERO.
THE STAR WARS TRILOGY TENDED
TO HAVE A NUMBER OF HEROIC
CHARACTERS BUT LUKE SKYWALKER
IN THE FIRST PART OF IT.
I DON'T THINK A PERSON
CAN DECLARE THEMSELVES
TO BE THE HERO.
A HERO'S DEFINED BY THE
ACTIONS THAT THEY UNDERGO.
A HERO'S DEFINED BY THE EVENTS
THAT HAPPEN TO THEM AND INDEED
THE RESPONSE - THE SPIRITUAL AND
MORAL RESPONSE TO THOSE EVENTS.
FOR GILGAMESH THERE
WAS ONE EVENT ABOVE ALL
THAT SYMBOLIZED HIS HEROISM:
WHEN HE SINGLE-HANDEDLY
ATTACKED AND KILLED
A PRIDE OF LIONS.
THE STORY OF GILGAMESH
AS HEROIC FIGURE
SPREAD ACROSS
THE MIDDLE EAST.
KINGS AND PRINCES FROM
PERSIA TO ANCIENT EGYPT
WERE ALL EAGER TO
EXPLOIT HIS FAME.
ONE KING IN PARTICULAR
SOUGHT TO PROMOTE HIMSELF
BY CAPITALIZING ON
THE HERO'S POWER.
THIS WAS ASHURBANAPAL,
KING OF ASSYRIA,
WHAT'S NOW
NORTHERN IRAQ.
BUT ASHURBANAPAL
HAD ONE BIG PROBLEM.
IN 645 BC HARDLY ANYONE COULD
READ A SCRIPT LIKE CUNEIFORM
SO ASHURBANAPAL DEPARTED
FROM A STORY TOLD IN WORDS
AND DEVISED INSTEAD A STORY
TOLD THROUGH PICTURES -
WITH HIMSELF, NOT GILGAMESH,
PLAYING THE LEAD ROLE.
IN A SERIES OF CARVED IMAGES
ASHURBANAPAL SHOWS HIMSELF,
LIKE GILGAMESH BEFORE HIM,
AS A SUPREME LION SLAYER.
THE FRIEZE IS MADE
UP OF FOUR IMAGES.
IN THE FIRST A SERVANT
LIFTS THE GATE ON A CAGE,
RELEASING A LION.
THE LION SPRINGS OUT AND
RUNS TOWARDS ASHURBANAPAL.
AS IT LEAPS INTO MID AIR
IT'S STRUCK BY AN ARROW.
AND IN A FINAL IMAGE
ASHURBANAPAL FINISHES OFF
THE LION WITH A SWORD
STABBED THROUGH ITS BODY.
THE SCULPTORS WANT US TO
SHARE THE THRILL OF THE ACTION.
THEY'VE CREATED A
SERIES OF FRIEZE FRAMES
CAPTURING THE EXCITEMENT
OF THE MOMENT.
AND DOMINATING THE FRIEZE
IS ITS HERO, ASHURBANAPAL.
ORIGINALLY THESE MAGNIFICENT
FRIEZES WOULD HAVE BEEN
PAINTED IN BRIGHT,
VIVID COLORS.
ASHURBANAPAL HAD THEM
PROMINENTLY DISPLAYED
ON THE WALLS OF
THE THRONE ROOM
OF HIS GREAT
PALACE AT NINEVAH.
ALTHOUGH THE PALACE
NO LONGER EXISTS,
USING THE
ARCHAEOLOGICAL REMAINS
WE'VE RECONSTRUCTED WHAT IT
MIGHT ONCE HAVE LOOKED LIKE.
ASHURBANAPAL'S STORY COULD BE
APPRECIATED NOT JUST BY THOSE
SELECT FEW WHO COULD READ,
BUT BY EVERYONE WHO COULD SEE.
BUT IN ITSELF THAT
WASN'T ENOUGH.
IMAGINE WATCHING A FILM IN
WHICH THE HERO ONLY APPEARS
IN ONE SCENE.
WHAT WE NEED TO FIND NEXT
IS A STORY THAT DEVELOPS -
A STORY WITH A BEGINNING,
MIDDLE, AND END.
IN SHORT: A
GRIPPING YARN.
ASHURBANAPAL HAD A NEW SERIES
OF RELIEFS MADE FOR HIS PALACE.
IT'S LIKE A STORYBOARD
FOR AN EPIC BLOCKBUSTER.
WITH A CAST OF THOUSANDS
IT TELLS THE STORY OF
ASHURBANAPAL'S WAR WITH
HIS ENEMIES, THE ELAMITES,
WHO CAN BE IDENTIFIED
BY THEIR HEADBANDS.
DURING A MIGHTY BATTLE,
THE BATTLE OF TIL-TUBA,
THE ELAMITES ARE FORCED
TO RETREAT INTO THE RIVER.
SOON IT'S RUNNING
RED WITH THEIR BLOOD.
ACCORDING TO
ASHURBANAPAL
THE RIVER WAS CHOKED WITH
CORPSES FOR THREE LONG DAYS.
THESE GRAPHIC IMAGES ARE AS
EXPLICIT AS ANY YOU WOULD SEE
IN A CONTEMPORARY
FEATURE FILM.
A BIRD IS TEARING
OUT A SOLDIER'S EYE.
AND HERE ONE OF
ASHURBANAPAL'S HENCHMEN
IS HOLDING THE HAIR OF
THE ELAMITE KING, TEUMMAN,
SEVERING HIS
HEAD FROM HIS BODY.
THE HEAD IS CARRIED AS A TROPHY
THROUGH THE ENEMY LINES.
WHAT WE'VE GOT HERE IS A COMPLEX
TALE UNFOLDING OVER MANY SCENES.
NOT ONLY DOES IT HAVE A
BEGINNING, MIDDLE, AND END
IT HAS SUB PLOTS MAKING
THE STORY MORE INTRIGUING.
AS THE BATTLE WITH
THE ELAMITES RAGES,
SOMETHING ELSE
IS HAPPENING.
A GROUP OF PRISONERS ARE
BEING FORCED TO GRIND DOWN
THE BONES OF THEIR
ANCESTORS TO MAKE BREAD.
JUST IMAGINE WHAT IT WOULD
HAVE BEEN LIKE FOR VISITORS
TO SEE THIS STORY ON THE WALL
OF THE GREAT HALL IN NINEVAH.
YOU WOULDN'T HAVE HAD TO
SPEAK THE ASSYRIAN LANGUAGE
TO GET THE POINT.
THE ASSYRIANS
LAID THE FOUNDATION
OF VISUAL
STORYTELLING.
THEY ESTABLISHED TWO KEY
ELEMENTS: A HERO AND A PLOT.
BUT THERE IS SOMETHING
CRITICAL MISSING HERE.
WHILE THERE'S LOTS OF
BLOOD AND VIOLENCE -
HERE TEUMMAN IS HAVING
HIS HEAD LOPPED OFF -
NO ONE SEEMS TO MIND.
THERE'S NO RAGE,
NO TEARS, NO EMOTION.
AND AS A RESULT IT'S HARD
TO BE INVOLVED IN THE STORY,
LET ALONE TO CARE
WHAT HAPPENS NEXT.
WE JUST DON'T FEEL ENGAGED
WITH THESE CHARACTERS,
SO WHEN AND HOW DID ANCIENT
ARTISTS MAKE US CARE?
TO FIND OUR ANSWER WE HAVE
TO LEAVE THE MIDDLE EAST.
WE NEED TO COME TO THE NORTHERN
SHORES OF THE MEDITERRANEAN
BECAUSE HERE THERE WAS
ANOTHER ANCIENT CIVILIZATION
WITH A RICH TRADITION OF
VIVID, EVOCATIVE STORYTELLING.
WHO ELSE BUT
THE GREEKS?
IF ANY CIVILIZATION COULD FIND A
WAY TO CREATE CHARACTERS THAT
PEOPLE COULD BELIEVE IN AND CARE
ABOUT, THEN THE GREEKS COULD.
THE GREEKS WERE OBSESSED WITH
THEIR EPIC STORIES, THEIR MYTHS.
AND THERE WAS ONE MYTH
ABOVE ALL THAT THE GREEKS
LIKED TO VISUALIZE:
HOMER'S TALE OF ODYSSEUS.
HERE ON THE COASTLINE OF
SPERLONGA IN SOUTHERN ITALY
GREEK ARTISTS CONVERTED
THIS ENORMOUS CAVE INTO A
DINING ROOM WHERE GUESTS WERE
LAVISHLY FED AND ENTERTAINED.
TODAY THE CAVE IS EMPTY,
BUT IN THE FIRST CENTURY BC
DINERS WOULD HAVE
BEEN SURROUNDED BY
MARBLE SCULPTURES
DEPICTING KEY SCENES
FROM THE STORY
OF ODYSSEUS.
AND THEY'D BE SEEN AT
THEIR BEST NOT DURING THE DAY
BUT AT NIGHT TIME, BY THE
LIGHT OF FLICKERING TORCHES.
THE STATUES ARE
NOW IN A MUSEUM,
BUT WITH THE AID OF COMPUTER
GRAPHICS WE CAN REUNITE THEM
WITH THEIR ORIGINAL LOCATION
IN THE EXACT POSITIONS
THEY WERE PLACED IN
OVER 2,000 YEARS AGO.
THIS MONUMENTAL SCULPTURE
ILLUSTRATES AN INCIDENT IN THE
DRAMATIC STORY OF ODYSSEUS'S
ENCOUNTER WITH A GIANT CYCLOPS.
BUT HOW DO THESE SCULPTURES
ADVANCE VISUAL STORYTELLING?
THE CYCLOPS, A GIANT
ONE-EYED CANNIBAL,
TRAPS ODYSSEUS AND
HIS SHIPMATES IN A CAVE.
ALTHOUGH THEY
FEAR FOR THEIR LIVES,
ODYSSEUS AND HIS
COMPANIONS SEIZE THEIR CHANCE
AND DRIVE A STAKE INTO THE
SINGLE EYE OF THE GIANT.
WHAT THE SCULPTORS HAVE
CHOSEN TO SHOW US IS THE
MOMENT OF MAXIMUM TENSION,
JUST BEFORE THE CLIMAX.
BUT WHY? BECAUSE IT'S AT
THIS MOMENT THE CHARACTERS'
EMOTIONS ARE AT
THEIR MOST REVEALING.
WE KNOW WHAT THEY'RE
THINKING AND FEELING.
BY DEPICTING REALISTIC EMOTIONS
GREEK ARTISTS HAD FOUND A WAY
TO BRING THEIR
STORIES ALIVE.
WITH THE LION-KILLING EXPLOITS
OF KING ASHURBANAPAL,
ARTISTS DISCOVERED
A STRONG HEROIC LEAD.
WITH HIS BATTLE SCENES THEY
INVENTED A GRIPPING STORYLINE.
AND IN THE CAVE
OF SPERLONGA,
THE GREEKS SHOWED HOW
TO CREATE CHARACTERS
AN AUDIENCE COULD BEGIN TO
IDENTIFY WITH EMOTIONALLY.
BUT SO FAR NONE OF THEM
HAD COMBINED ALL OF THESE
INGREDIENTS IN A
SINGLE VISUAL STORY.
WELL, NOT, THAT IS, UNTIL 100
YEARS AFTER THE BIRTH OF CHRIST.
WELCOME TO TRAJAN'S
COLUMN IN THE HEART OF ROME.
IT'S QUITE LITERALLY THE
HIGHEST FORM OF STORYTELLING
THAT THERE IS.
AT 35 METERS HIGH, THE
MARBLE COLUMN STOOD ABOVE
ALL OTHER BUILDINGS
IN ANCIENT ROME.
THE COLUMN WAS BUILT
BY THE EMPEROR, TRAJAN.
IT COMMEMORATES HIS VICTORY
IN THE WAR AGAINST HIS ENEMIES,
THE DACIANS, IN WHAT IS
TODAY MODERN ROMANIA.
THE SPOILS OF THESE WARS
PAID NOT JUST FOR THE COLUMN
BUT ALSO FOR THE SURROUNDING
COMPLEX OF MARKETS, LIBRARIES,
SQUARES, AND PUBLIC
MONUMENTS OF TRAJAN'S FORUM.
ALAS, TODAY THE FORUM IS
LITTLE MORE THAN RUBBLE.
TRAJAN'S COLUMN ALONE
HAS SURVIVED BECAUSE
FOR ALMOST 2,000 YEARS
IT'S HELD A FASCINATION
FOR SOME OF THE MOST
POWERFUL MEN IN HISTORY.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE
ADMIRED THE COLUMN SO MUCH
HE WANTED IT DISMANTLED
AND BROUGHT TO PARIS.
HE WAS ONLY DISSUADED WHEN TOLD
IT WOULDN'T SURVIVE THE JOURNEY.
THE COLUMN WAS ALSO SPECIAL TO
THE ITALIAN DICTATOR MUSSOLINI.
WHEN THE SECOND
WORLD WAR BROKE OUT
HE HAD IT PROTECTED BY
BOMB-PROOF CLADDING.
SO WHAT WAS IT ABOUT THE
COLUMN THAT SO IMPRESSED
ROMAN CITIZENS, EMPERORS,
DICTATORS, AND TOURISTS ALIKE?
WELL, IT'S HERE THAT ALL
THE VISUAL STORYTELLING
DISCOVERIES OF THE ANCIENT
WORLD CAME TOGETHER.
OVER A CONTINUOUS 200 METER LONG
FRIEZE WE'VE GOT A COMPLEX TALE.
IT SPIRALS AROUND THE MONUMENT
23 TIMES AND TELLS THE DETAILED
STORY OF TRAJAN'S CAMPAIGN
AGAINST THE DACIANS.
IT'S BEEN CALLED A MOVIE
EPIC FROZEN IN STONE.
IN EMPEROR TRAJAN WE
HAVE AN UNDISPUTED HERO.
HE APPEARS AS A POWERFUL
AND DIGNIFIED LEADER
IN ALMOST EVERY SCENE.
OVER THE MONUMENT AS A
WHOLE, HE APPEARS 59 TIMES.
WE'VE ALSO GOT OUR VILLAIN:
THE DACIAN LEADER, DECEBALUS
- CRAFTY, SCHEMING,
CONVINCINGLY EVIL.
AND WE'VE GOT AN EPIC
SUPPORTING CAST OF
TWO AND A HALF THOUSAND
EXTRAS WHOSE EMOTIONS
AND FEELINGS ARE MADE
INDIVIDUALLY APPARENT.
BUT THAT'S
JUST THE START.
AS A MASTERPIECE OF
VISUAL STORYTELLING,
TRAJAN'S COLUMN
HAD SO MUCH MORE.
IT WAS EVEN ANTICIPATING
CERTAIN FILM TECHNIQUES
THAT DIRECTORS
WOULD BE FAMILIAR WITH.
HERE THE SCULPTOR
HAS DEPICTED A TREE...
BUT THIS ISN'T JUST TO
ADORN THE LANDSCAPE.
THIS TREE HAS A MORE
IMPORTANT ROLE.
THE SCULPTORS USED IT TO
DIVIDE TWO DISTINCT SCENES,
JUST AS TODAY A FILM DIRECTOR
WOULD USE A VISUAL CUT.
ELSEWHERE THE SCULPTORS HAVE
USED ANOTHER VISUAL DEVICE
THAT'S FAMILIAR TO
FILMMAKERS TODAY.
THEY'VE CHOSEN TO
SHOW THE ROMAN ARMY,
BURIED UNDER THEIR
SHIELDS, FROM ABOVE.
IT'S CALLED "A
BIRD'S EYE VIEW".
THEY'VE ALSO CHOSEN TO SHOW
OTHER SOLDIERS INVOLVED IN THE
SAME SCENE WITH A DIFFERENT
VIEWPOINT: FROM A LOWER ANGLE.
WHAT THE SCULPTORS REALIZED
IS THAT BY OFFERING MULTIPLE
VIEWPOINTS THEY CAN MAKE
THE BATTLE MORE DRAMATIC.
THERE ISN'T A FILMMAKER
TODAY WHO DOES NOT EXPLOIT
THESE SAME
VISUAL TECHNIQUES.
CINEMA IS A KIND OF VISUAL
MUSIC THAT YOU PLAY WITH THE
COLORS AND INSTRUMENTATIONS,
AS YOU WOULD IN AN ORCHESTRA,
SO WITH VARIOUS SHOTS.
SO THERE IS A DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN THE CLOSE-UP AND
THE WIDE SHOT AND SO ON.
THE CREATORS OF TRAJAN'S
COLUMN HAD YET ANOTHER
TRICK UP THEIR SLEEVES.
THEY FOUND A WAY
OF SUMMARIZING
THE MOST DRAMATIC
MOMENTS OF THEIR STORY.
BY LOOKING UP THE NORTHWEST
VERTICAL AXIS THE VIEWER COULD
SEE AT A GLANCE THE HIGHLIGHTED
VERSION OF THIS EPIC.
IT GOES SOMETHING
LIKE THIS:
ONE EMPEROR WANTS
TO CONQUER THE WORLD.
NO ONE STANDS
IN HIS WAY.
EXCEPT ONE MAN WHO IS
PREPARED TO SACRIFICE ALL
TO SAVE HIS PEOPLE.
WAR IS INEVITABLE.
TORTURE...
ARSON...
BETRAYAL...
BUT ONLY ONE SIDE HAS
THE SUPPORT OF THE GODS.
ONLY ONE SIDE CAN WIN
ULTIMATE VICTORY.
THERE YOU GO... THE
WORLD'S FIRST EVER TRAILER.
TRAJAN'S COLUMN SEEMS
TO HAVE EVERYTHING.
IT'S THE CULMINATION OF
THOUSANDS OF YEARS OF
DISCOVERIES IN THE ART OF
TELLING STORIES WITH PICTURES.
IT MAY HAVE GRABBED THE
IMAGINATIONS OF ANCIENT ROMANS
BUT IT DOESN'T DO
MUCH FOR US TODAY.
STANDING IN FRONT OF THIS
MONUMENT IT'S HARD TO BELIEVE
YOU'VE GONE ON AN
IMAGINARY JOURNEY
TO THE KILLING
FIELDS OF ROMANIA.
IT JUST DOESN'T DO IT.
EVEN THOUGH IT USES SO MANY
OF THE STORYTELLING DEVICES
OF MODERN-DAY FILMS, IT HASN'T
GOT THE POWER TO CAPTIVATE US.
AND THAT'S NOT JUST BECAUSE
THE PICTURES AREN'T IN MOTION.
TRAJAN'S COLUMN SEEMS TO
BE MISSING A FINAL ELEMENT.
BUT PERHAPS WE'VE BEEN
LOOKING IN THE WRONG PLACES.
WE WOULDN'T BE
THE FIRST TO DO SO.
THIS IS CAMBRIDGE
UNIVERSITY.
FOR CENTURIES THE
GREAT CENTERS OF LEARNING
HAD LOOKED
EXCLUSIVELY TO THE WEST
FOR THE ANSWERS
TO THEIR QUESTIONS.
SCHOLARS BELIEVED THAT IT WAS
THE CLASSICAL CIVILIZATIONS
OF GREECE AND ROME
THAT HAD MADE THE GREAT
BREAKTHROUGHS IN
THE ANCIENT WORLD.
BUT THEY CAME TO REALIZE THAT
THE CLASSICAL CIVILIZATIONS
DIDN'T HAVE ALL
THE ANSWERS.
AND SO RESEARCHERS
BEGAN TO LOOK ELSEWHERE.
RESEARCHERS BEGAN TO
EXPLORE PARTS OF THE WORLD
MUCH FURTHER AFIELD.
THEY STARTED TO INVESTIGATE
CULTURES THAT UNTIL THEN
HAD BEEN
TOTALLY IGNORED.
WHAT THEY DISCOVERED
WILL GIVE US THE FINAL PIECE
OF OUR JIGSAW: A WAY OF
TELLING STORIES WITH PICTURES
THAT IS TRULY CAPTIVATING.
AND THIS SAME TECHNIQUE IS
ONE THAT HAS PROVED CRUCIAL
TO THE SUCCESS OF EVERY
FEATURE FILM MADE TODAY.
THAT DISCOVERY WAS MADE ON A
CONTINENT THOUSANDS OF MILES
FROM EUROPE ON THE
OTHER SIDE OF THE WORLD:
AUSTRALIA.
WHEN THE FIRST EUROPEANS ARRIVED
HERE BACK IN THE 18TH CENTURY,
THEY FOUND THEMSELVES IN A
SEVERE AND HOSTILE LANDSCAPE.
AS THE EUROPEANS BEGAN
TO EXPLORE THIS LANDSCAPE
THEY FOUND SOMETHING
THAT BAFFLED THEM.
IN MANY OF THE CAVES
AND ROCK SHELTERS
THEY CAME ACROSS STRANGE
AND MYSTERIOUS IMAGES.
HERE IN ARNHEMLAND IN THE
NORTH OF AUSTRALIA ARE SOME
OF THE OLDEST PAINTED IMAGES
FOUND ANYWHERE ON THE PLANET.
RECENT RESEARCH HAS SHOWN
THAT SOME OF THEM DATE BACK
OVER 40,000 YEARS.
THESE ARE THE WORLD'S
FIRST ART GALLERIES.
THE EUROPEAN SETTLERS HAD
A SENSE THAT THESE WERE VERY
OLD IMAGES BUT DISMISSED
THEM AS CHILDISH DOODLES.
THEN AT THE BEGINNING OF THE
20TH CENTURY AN ENGLISHMAN
ARRIVED IN THE SMALL COMMUNITY
OF OENPELLI IN ARNHEMLAND.
HE WAS A BIOLOGIST
BY TRAINING
AND HIS NAME WAS
BALDWIN SPENCER.
DURING HIS STAY IN OENPELLI,
SPENCER LIVED AMONG
THE ABORIGINAL PEOPLE.
ALTHOUGH HE'D SPENT TIME WITH
OTHER ABORIGINAL COMMUNITIES,
HE FOUND SOMETHING HERE
THAT HE'D NEVER SEEN BEFORE.
THE ABORIGINAL
PEOPLE OF OENPELLI
WERE OBSESSED
BY PAINTING.
WHEREVER HE WENT HE
FOUND ARTISTS AT WORK,
EITHER PAINTING ON BITS
OF STRINGY BARK FROM THE
EUCALYPTUS TREE OR
ON THE CAVE WALLS.
IT'S THE SAME
EVEN TODAY.
SPENCER BECAME MORE AND MORE
INTRIGUED BY THESE PAINTINGS.
IT WAS THIS CURIOSITY THAT
LED TO HIS BREAKTHROUGH.
HE NOTICED HOW ABORIGINAL
ARTISTS WERE PAINTING
THE SAME IMAGES
OVER AND OVER AGAIN:
THE IMAGE OF THE
BARRAMUNDI FISH...
EARTH MOTHER, YINGARNA...
OR THE LIGHTNING MAN.
THIS, FOR INSTANCE, IS A
GROUP OF BARRAMUNDI FISH
PAINTED BY A MODERN
ABORIGINAL ARTIST.
AND THIS IS THE
SAME SUBJECT
PAINTED THOUSANDS
OF YEARS BEFORE.
THIS IS YINGARNA THE EARTH
MOTHER AS PAINTED TODAY...
AND THIS IS YINGARNA
FROM THE ANCIENT PAST.
THE SAME IS TRUE OF MANY OF THE
IMPORTANT ABORIGINAL IMAGES.
WHAT THIS MEANT WAS
THAT HERE IN ARNHEMLAND,
UNIQUELY IN THE WORLD, THERE
IS A CONTINUOUS ARTISTIC LINK
FROM THE ANCIENT PAST
TO THE PRESENT DAY.
SPENCER REALIZED HE NOW
HAD A RARE OPPORTUNITY.
IF HE COULD ONLY DISCOVER THE
INSPIRATION BEHIND 20TH CENTURY
ABORIGINAL ART HE COULD THEN
UNLOCK THE SECRETS OF THE
ANCIENT PAINTING IN THE CAVES
AND THE ROCK SHELTERS.
AND WHEN HE TALKED
TO ABORIGINAL PEOPLE
ABOUT THEIR ART
THEY TOLD HIM
THAT THEIR PAINTINGS
WERE TELLING STORIES.
WHEN YOU LOOK AT THEM
IT'S HARD TO BELIEVE THESE
SINGLE IMAGES CAN
TELL A WHOLE STORY.
SO HOW DO THEY WORK?
THIS IS
THOMPSON YULIDJIRRI,
ONE OF THE MOST FAMOUS
ABORIGINAL ARTISTS IN THE AREA.
AS HE PAINTED AN IMAGE, THOMPSON
BEGAN TO TELL A STORY ABOUT
THE MOST IMPORTANT ANCESTRAL
SPIRIT: THE RAINBOW SERPENT.
IN THE BEGINNING A LITTLE ORPHAN
BOY WAS PLAYING WITH HIS BROTHER
WHEN HE BECAME HUNGRY.
BUT WHEN HE FOUND OUT
HIS FAVORITE FOOD, YAMS,
HAD BEEN EATEN BY HIS
FAMILY HE BEGAN TO CRY.
HIS KINDLY BROTHER CALLED
UP AN ANCESTRAL SPIRIT,
THE RAINBOW SERPENT,
AND ASKED FOR HIS HELP
AND THE FAMILY WERE PUNISHED
FOR BEING SO GREEDY".
ABORIGINAL ARTISTS DON'T
PAINT A SEQUENCE OF IMAGES
TO TELL THEIR STORIES,
INSTEAD THEY USE SINGLE
STYLIZED IMAGES TO TRIGGER
IN THE MIND OF THE ONLOOKER
STORIES THEY
WOULD ALREADY KNOW.
IT'S THESE PAINTED STORIES
TOLD IN A SINGLE IMAGE
THAT HAVE ENDURED
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS.
SO WHAT WAS IT THAT GAVE
THEM THE POWER TO CAPTIVATE
THE MINDS OF ABORIGINAL
PEOPLE AND TO BE PASSED ON
THROUGH COUNTLESS
GENERATIONS?
THIS WOULDN'T BE REVEALED
TO A WORLDWIDE AUDIENCE
UNTIL THE 1960'S.
IT WAS THEN THAT A YOUNG
BRITISH TELEVISION PRESENTER
CAME WITH HIS CREW
TO THIS REMOTE REGION.
HIS NAME: DAVID
ATTENBOROUGH.
I HAVE VERY VIVID MEMORIES OF
SQUEEZING THROUGH CRACKS AND
COMING UP AND LOOKING UP
AND SEEING THE SURFACE
OF THE CRACK I'M IN, ONLY A
FEW INCHES FROM MY HEAD,
AND SUDDENLY BEING
AWARE THERE WERE HUGE
BARRAMUNDI FISH ON THE
CEILING. AND KANGAROOS.
AND THEN SPIRIT FIGURES.
STRANGE LITTLE STICK-LIKE
FIGURES THAT WERE HUNTING.
IT WAS UNFORGETTABLE.
>>DAVID ATTENBOROUGH WAS
FASCINATED BY THE STORIES
TOLD THROUGH
THESE SINGLE IMAGES.
LIKE SPENCER, HE TOO
REALIZED THE KEY TO THE PAST
LAY IN UNDERSTANDING
THE PRESENT.
THIS IS A SACRED PLACE - A
CAVE SACRED TO THE ABORIGINES
OF THIS PART OF
NORTHERN AUSTRALIA.
THE ABORIGINES
STILL PAINT.
FROM THEM, THEREFORE, WE MAY
BE ABLE TO GET SOME INSIGHT
INTO THE VERY
ORIGINS OF ART.
>>SO DAVID ATTENBOROUGH
BEGAN TO SPEND TIME
WITH MODERN ABORIGINAL
PAINTERS TO TRY TO UNDERSTAND
WHY THEIR STORIES
HAD LASTED SO LONG.
HE MET AN ABORIGINAL
PAINTER CALLED MUGANI.
I DIDN'T REALLY KNOW
WHAT TO EXPECT.
I USED TO SIT WITH HIM AND HE
HAD A BRUSH THAT WAS MADE
BY CHEWING ON THE
END OF A LITTLE STICK
AND HE'D PUT THESE MARKS
ON THEM AND I'D WATCH THEM.
ANYWAY, SO WE GOT TO KNOW
ONE ANOTHER AND SO I WAS
ABLE TO ASK HIM, NOT DIRECTLY,
"WHY ARE YOU PAINTING?"
YOU'D SAY "WHAT OF THIS
FELLOW? WHAT OF THAT?"
TELL ME ABOUT THIS
PLACE HERE. WHAT'S THAT?
A DOG.
AND THEN ON ONE PAINTING
THERE WAS THIS LONG,
LONG RECTANGULAR SHAPE
AND I SAID "WHAT'S THAT?"
AND MUGANI LEANED FORWARD AND
SAID RATHER HOARSELY "SECRET".
WHY DO YOU
TALK SO SOFT?
IF WE TALK HARD
WHO MIGHT HEAR?
SO I SAID, WELL, COULD
YOU TELL ME WHAT IT WAS?
AND HE THOUGHT ABOUT IT A
BIT AND THEN HE SAID "OKAY.
TOMORROW TIME, YOU
COME TOMORROW TIME".
WE WALKED FOR I SUPPOSE ABOUT 20
MINUTES AND THERE WAS ANOTHER
ENCAMPMENT AND INSIDE THIS
ENCAMPMENT COVERED IN LEAVES,
VERY SECRET, THERE WAS
THIS HUGE PIPE, DIDGERIDOO,
I MEAN FOUR OR
FIVE FEET LONG.
AND THIS WAS WHAT WAS
REPRESENTED IN THE PAINTING.
AND THEN WE ENTERED THE
BUSH WHERE A BIG CEREMONY
WAS GOING TO TAKE PLACE
IN WHICH THE TRUMPET WITH
THE DESIGNS THAT IT CARRIED
WAS AN ESSENTIAL ELEMENT.
>>THE STORIES PAINTED BY
ABORIGINAL ARTISTS HAD GAINED
THEIR POWER BECAUSE THEY'D
BEEN COMBINED WITH MUSIC.
THEY WERE DESIGNED TO
STIMULATE TWO SENSES:
THE EYES AND THE EARS.
AND IT WAS THIS THAT HAD
MADE THEM SO ENDURING.
THE ABORIGINAL
COMMUNITY OF OENPELLI
STILL PERFORMS STORYTELLING
CEREMONIES TODAY.
SOON WE WOULD WITNESS
WHAT DAVID ATTENBOROUGH SAW
ALL THOSE YEARS AGO.
PEOPLE SLOWLY ASSEMBLED
IN THE MORNING.
ONE OF THEM STARTING
SINGING WITH CLICK STICKS,
MORE MEN CAME, AND
THEN THEY STARTED PAINTING
THEMSELVES WITH TOTEMIC
DESIGNS ON THEIR CHESTS.
IT WAS A SENSE OF PRIVILEGE AND
OF HOLDING THE BREATH, REALLY,
BECAUSE YOU WERE IN THE
PRESENCE OF SOMETHING
VERY POWERFUL
AND MEANINGFUL.
IT'S A HIGHLY EMOTIONALLY
CHARGED MOMENT.
>>THE PREPARATIONS
WERE COMPLETE.
THE DANCERS WAITED
FOR NIGHT TO FALL.
THE DANCERS ASSEMBLED
BENEATH A ROCK CANOPY
COVERED IN ANCIENT
PAINTED STORIES.
THE STORIES THEN
BEGAN TO COME ALIVE.
(CHANTING)
>>IN THE ANCIENT PAST, LONG
BEFORE THE CLASSICAL
CIVILIZATIONS OF THE WEST
HAD MADE THEIR STORYTELLING
DISCOVERIES, ABORIGINAL ARTISTS
HAD FOUND A WAY TO CAPTIVATE
THEIR AUDIENCE AND TRANSPORT
THEM TO IMAGINARY WORLDS.
TO TRY AND IDENTIFY THE TRUTH
OF WHICH THOSE PAINTINGS WERE
A PART, YOU HAVE TO RECOGNIZE
THAT THEY ARE ONLY A PART.
THEY DON'T EXIST
BY THEMSELVES.
THEY'RE ACCOMPANIED BY MUSIC,
BY SINGING, BY DIDGERIDOO,
BY CLICK STICKS, AND
THEY ARE ACCOMPANIED BY
NARRATIVES IN SONGS OF
IMMENSELY COMPLEX STORIES.
SO THE MUSIC IS AN INTEGRAL
ELEMENT FROM ALL KINDS OF
POINTS OF VIEW AND TO
ABSTRACT THAT FROM A PIECE
OF PAINTING IS TO...
IMPOVERISH THE PAINTING.
♪
>>THIS, THEN, IS THE
KEY TO THE SECRET
OF ABORIGINAL
STORYTELLING.
IT'S THIS SOUNDTRACK THAT
HAD GIVEN THEIR STORIES
THE POWER TO SURVIVE
FOR THOUSANDS OF YEARS.
IMAGES PULSING
WITH SOUND.
BUT THE REST OF THE WORLD
WOULDN'T COME TO EXPLOIT
THIS TECHNIQUE UNTIL
MUCH, MUCH LATER...
LONG AFTER THE CLASSICAL
CIVILIZATIONS HAD BEEN AND GONE.
IT WASN'T UNTIL THE GREAT
RELIGIONS BEGAN TO REALIZE
THE FULL POTENTIAL
OF THE SOUNDTRACK
THAT ITS USE BEGAN TO
SPREAD ACROSS THE WORLD.
WHEN IT DID, THE
RESULT WAS EXPLOSIVE.
♪ HALLELUJAH, HALLELUJAH!
HALLELUJAH, HALLELUJAH, ♪
♪ HALLELUJAH! ♪
NOW RELIGIOUS STORYTELLERS
COULD USE THE CAPTIVATING
POWER OF PICTURES
COMBINED WITH MUSIC
TO REINFORCE THEIR
SPIRITUAL MESSAGE.
♪
♪ HALLELUJAH, HALLELUJAH!
HALLELUJAH, HALLELUJAH, ♪
♪ HALLELUJAH! ♪
THEN IN 1894 A NEW VISUAL
STORYTELLING MEDIUM
WAS INVENTED:
MOVING PICTURES.
THIS IS THE FIRST
FEATURE FILM IN HISTORY.
IT TOO COMES FROM AUSTRALIA
AND TELLS THE STORY
OF THE OUTLAW
NED KELLY.
HERE IS A HERO, A PLOT, AND
CHARACTERS WITH EMOTIONS.
BUT IT LACKS THAT
CRUCIAL INGREDIENT.
AS SOON AS FILMMAKERS
DISCOVERED HOW TO PUT
SOUND INTO THEIR FILMS
CINEMA REALLY TOOK OFF.
FINALLY DIRECTORS COULD
UNLOCK THE FULL POTENTIAL
OF MOVING PICTURES.
THEY'D FOUND A WAY TO
MOVE AN AUDIENCE SO MUCH
THEY FELT AS THOUGH
THEY'D BEEN TRANSPORTED
TO ANOTHER WORLD.
ONE CANNOT UNDERESTIMATE
THE POWER OF SOUND EFFECTS
AND MUSIC IN MODERN-DAY
FILMMAKING AND STORYTELLING.
SO THAT WHEN YOU COME TO
SOMETHING LIKE LORENZO'S OIL
WHERE WE HAVE A SCENE WHERE
THE PARENTS HAVING LEARNED OF
THEIR TERRIBLE DIAGNOSIS
AND PROGNOSIS OF THEIR SON
HAVE TO MAKE THE LONG WALK
OUT OF THE DOCTOR'S OFFICE.
WE ENHANCED THEIR DEMEANOR,
THEIR MOOD, THEIR ANGUISH
BY THE EXAGGERATED
SOUND OF THEIR FOOTSTEPS...
BY THE LAUGHTER
OF A LITTLE GIRL...
AND WITH THE MUSIC.
THEY'RE HIDING THEIR
EMOTIONS BECAUSE THEY
DON'T WANT THEIR SON TO
KNOW HOW THEY'RE FEELING
AND YET THE MUSIC IS
TELLING US HOW THEY FEEL.
WHEN WE GET HOME
CAN YOU READ A STORY?
OF COURSE, MY DARLING.
LET'S GO HOME.
HAVE YOU EVER WONDERED WHY,
WHEN YOU'VE WATCHED A REALLY
GOOD FILM, RATHER THAN LEAVE THE
CINEMA YOU STAY IN YOUR SEAT
AND LISTEN TO THE MUSIC
PLAYING OVER THE END CREDITS?
IT'S BECAUSE YOU'VE BEEN
TRANSPORTED TO ANOTHER WORLD;
AND ONCE THERE, YOU
CAN'T BEAR TO LEAVE.
SO POWERFUL HAS
THAT EXPERIENCE BEEN,
YOU JUST DON'T WANT
THE MAGIC TO END.
♪